Book of Common Prayer
Church of England

An Act for the Vniformity of Common Prayer, and Service

in the Church, and Administration of the Sacraments,

primo Elisabethæ

Where at the death of our late sovereign Lord King Edward the sixth, there remained one vniform order of Common service and prayer, and of the Administration of sacraments, Rites and Ceremonies in the Church of England which was set forth, in one Book, intituled, The Book of Com̃on Prayer, and Administration of Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies in the Church of England, authorized by Act of Parliament holden in the fifth and sixth years of our said late soveraign Lord King Edward the sixth, intituled, An Act for the vniformity of common prayer, and Administration of the sacraments : The which was repealed and taken away by Act of Parliament in the first year of the raign of our late soveraign Lady Queen Mary to the great decay of the due honour of God, and discomfort to the Professo ̣ of the truth of Christs religion.

Be it therefore enacted by the authority of this present Parliament, that the said statute of repeal, and every thing therein contained, only concerning the said Book, and the service, Administration of sacraments, Rites, and Ceremonies contained or appointed in or by the said book, shall be void, and of none effect, from and after the feast of the Nativity of S ̣ Iohn Baptist next coming.

And that the said book with the order of service, and of the administration of Sacraments, Rites, and Ceremonies, with the Alteration and additions therein added and appointed by this statute, shall stand and be from and after the said feast of the nativity of Saint Iohn Baptist in full force and effect, according to the tenor and effect of this statute : anything in the foresaid statute of repeal to the contrary notwithstanding.

And further be it enacted by the Queens Highness, with the assent of the Lords and Commons of this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, that all and singular Ministers in any Cathedrall, or parish-church, or other place within this Realm of England, Wales, and the Marches of the same, or other the Queens dominions, shall from and after the feast of the nativity of S. Iohn Baptist next coming, be bounden to say and vse the Mattens, Evensong, celebration of the Lords supper, and Administration of each of the sacraments, and all other common and open prayer in such order and form as is mentioned in the said book, so authorized by Parliament in the said fifth and sixth year of the reign of King Edward the sixth, with one alteration or addition of certein lessons to be vsed on every Sunday in the year, and the form of the Letany altered, and corrected, and two sentences only added in the delivery of the sacrament to the communicants, and none other or otherwise. And that if any manner of Parson, Vicar, or other whatsoever Minister, that ought or should sing or say common prayer mentioned in the said book, or minister the Sacraments from and after the feast of the nativity of Saint John Baptist next coming, refuse to vse the said common prayers, or to minister the sacraments, in such Cathedral, or Parish church, or other places, as he should vse to minister the same in such order and form as they be mentioned and set forth in the said book, or shall wilfully or obstinately standing in the same, vse any other Rite, Ceremony, Order, Form, or Manner of celebrating of the Lords Supper openly or privily, or Mattens, Evensong, Administration of the sacraments, or other open prayers, then is mentioned and set forth in the said book [Open prayer of Common Prayer prayer in and through this Act, is meant that prayer which is for other to come vnto, or hear, either in common churches, or private Chappels, or Oratories, commonly called, the Service of the Church] or shall preach, declare, or speak any thing in the derogation, or depraving of the said book, or any thing therein conteined, or of any part thereof, and shall be thereof lawfully convicted, according to the lawes of this Realm by verdict of twelve men, or by his own confession, or by the notorious evidence of the fact : shall lose and forfeit to the Queens Highness her heirs and successors, for his first offence, the profit of all his spirituall benefices, or promotions, coming or arising in one whole year next after his conviction : And also that the person so convicted, shall for the same offence suffer imprisonment by the space of six months without bail or mainprise. And if any such person once convict of any offence concerning the premisses, shall after his first conviction, eftsoons offend, and be thereof in form aforesaid lawfully convict : that then the same person shall for his second offence suffer imprisonment, by the space of one whole year, and also shall therefore be deprived ipso facto of all his spiritual promotions, And that it shall be lawfull to all Patrons or donors of all and singular the same spirituall promotions or any of them to present or collate to the same, as though the person or persons so offending were dead. And that if any such person or persons after he shall be twice convicted in form aforesaid, shall offend against any of the premisses the third time, and shall be thereof in form aforesaid lawfully convicted: that then the person so offending, and convicted the third time, shall be deprived ipso facto of all his spirituall promotions, and also shall suffer imprisonment during his life.

And if the person that shall offend and be convict in form aforesaid, concerning any of the premisses, shall not be beneficed, nor have any spirituall promotion: that then the same person so offending, and convict, shall for the first offence suffer imprisonment during one whole year next after his said conviction, without bail or mainprise. And if any such person not having any spiritual promotion, after his first conviction shall eftsoons offend in any thing concerning the premisses, and shall in form aforesaid be thereof lawfully convicted, that then the same person shall for his second offence suffer imprisonment during his life.

And it is ordained and enacted by the authority aforesaid that if any person or persons whatsoever after the said feast of the nativity of Saint Iohn Baptist next coming shall in any Enterludes, Playes, Songs, Rimes, or by other open words declare or speake any thing in the derogation, depriving or despising of the same book, or of any thing therein conteined, or any part thereof, or shall by open fact, deed, or by open threatnings compell or cause, or otherwise procure or mantein any Parson, Vicar or other Minister, in any Cathedrall or parish church, or in chappel, or in any other place to sing or say any common or open prayer, or to minister any sacrament otherwise, or in any other manner and form then is mentioned in the said book, or that by any of the said means shall vnlawfully interrupt, or let any Parson Vicar or other Minister in any Cathedrall or parish church, chappel, or any other place, to sing or say common and open prayer, or to minister the sacraments, or any of them in such manner and form as is mentioned in the said book: that then every such person, being thereof lawfully convicted in form abovesaid, shall forfeit to the Queen our Soveraign Lady, her heirs, and successrs . for the first offence an hundred marks. And if any person or persons being once convict of any such offence, eftsoons offend against any of the last recited offences, and shall in form aforesaid be thereof lawfully convict: that then the same person so offending and convict, shall for the second offence forfeit to the Queen our Sovereign Lady, her heirs and successors four hundred Marks. And if any person after he in form aforesaid shall have been twice convict of any offence concerning any of the last recited offences, shall offend the third time, and be thereof in form abovesaid lawfully convict: that then every person so offending and convict, shall for his third offence forfeit to our Sovereign Lady the Queen all his goods and chattels, and shall suffer imprisonment during his life. And if any person or persons that for his first offence concerning the premisses shall be convict in form aforesaid, do not pay the summe to be payed by virtue of his conviction, in such manner and form as the same ought to be payed, within six weeks next after his conviction : that then every person so convict, and so not paying the same, shall for the same first offence, instead of the said summe, suffer imprisonment by the space of six months without bail or mainprise : And if any person or persons that for his second offence concerning the premisses shall be convict in form aforesaid, do not pay the said summe to be paied by virtue of his conviction, and this estatute in such manner and form as the same ought to be payed within six weeks next after this said second conviction : that then every person so convicted, and not paying the same, shall for the same second offence, in the stead of the said summe, suffer imprisonment during twelve monthes without Bail or mainprise. And that from and after the said feast of the nativity of Saint John Baptist next coming all and every person and persons inhabiting within this Realm, or any other the Queens Maiesties Dominions, shall diligently and faithfully, having no lawfull or reasonable excuse to be absent, indeavour themselves to resort to their parish church or chappell accustomed, or vpon reasonable let thereof, to some vsuall place where common prayer, and such service of God shall be vsed in such tyme of let, vpon every Sunday, and other dayes ordained, and vsed to be kept as holy dayes : and then and there to abide orderly and soberly during the time of common prayer, preachings or other service of God there to be vsed and ministred, vpon pain of punishment by the censures of the Church : and also vpon pain that every person so offending shall forfeit for every such offence twelve pence to be levied by the church-wardens of the parish where such offence shall be don to the vse of the poor of the same parish, of the goods lands and tenements of such offender, by way of distress. And for due execution hereof, the Queens most excellent Majesty, the Lords temporall, and all the Commons in this present Parliament assembled doth in Gods name earnestly require and charge all the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ordinaries that they shall endeavour themselves to the vttermost of their knowledges that the due and true execution hereof may be had throughout their Diocess and charges, as they will answer before God, for such evils and plagues wherewith Almighty God may iustly punish his people for neglecting his good and wholesom law. And for the authority in this behalf, be it further inacted by the authority aforesayd that all and singular the same Archbishops, Bishops, and all other their officers exercising ecclesiasticall Jurisdiction, as well in place exempt, as not exempt within their Diocess, shall have full power and authority by this Act to reform correct, and punish by censures of the church, all and singular persons which shall offend within any of their Jurisdictions, or Diocess after the said feast of the nativity of Saint John Baptist next coming against this act and statute : any other law, Statute, priviledge liberty or provision heretofore made had or suffered to the contrary notwithstanding.

And it is ordained and enacted by the authority aforesaid that all and every Justice of Oyer and Determiner, or Iustices of Assize shall have full power and authority in every of their open and generall sessions, to inquire hear and determine all and all manner of offences, that shall be committed or done contrary to any Article conteined in this present Act, within the limits of the Commission to them directed, and to make process for the execution of the same, as they may do against any person being indicted before them of trespass, or lawfully convicted thereof.

Provided alwayes, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid that all and every Archbishop and Bishop shall and may at all time and times at his liberty and pleasure ioin, and associate himself, by virtue of this Act, to the said Iustices of Oyer, and Determiner, or to the said Iustices of Assize, at every of the said open and generall sessions, to be holden in any place within his Diocess for and to the inquiry, hearing, and determining of the offences aforesaid.

Provided also, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid that the books concerning the said service, shall at the costs and charges of the parishioners of every parish, and Cathedrall church be attained and gotten before the said feast of the nativity of Saint John Baptist next following: and that all such parishes and Cathedrall churches, or other places where the said books shall be attained, and gotten before the said feast of the nativity of Saint John Baptist, shall within three weeks next after the said books so attained and gotten, vse the said service and put the same in vse according to this Act.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that no person or persons shall be at any time hereafter impeached or otherwise molested of or for any of the offences above mentioned hereafter to be committed or don contrary to this Act vnless he or they so offending be thereof indicted at the next generall sessions to be holden before any such Justices of Oyer and Determiner, or Justices of Assize next after any offence committed or don contrary to the tenor of this Act.

Provided allwayes and be it ordained and enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all and singular Lords of the Parliament for the third offence above mentioned, shall be tryed by their Peers

Provided also and be it ordained and enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Major of London, and all other Majors Bayliffs, and other head-officers of all and singular cities, boroughs, and towns corporate within this Realm, Wales, and the Marches of the same to the which Iustices of Assize do not commonly repair, shall have full power and authority by virtue of this Act to enquire hear and determine the offences above said and every of them yearly, within fifteen dayes after the feasts of Easter, and Saint Michael the Archangel, in like manner and form as Justices of Assize, and Oyer, and Determiner may do.

Provided always, and be it ordained and enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all and singular Archbishops, and Bishops, and every of their Chancellors, Commissaries, Archdeacons, and other Ordinaries, having any peculiar ecclesiasticall jurisdiction, shall have full power and authority by virtue of this Act, as well to inquire in their Visitation, Synods, or elsewhere within their iurisdiction, at any other time and place to take accusations and informations of all and every the things above mentioned, done committed or perpetrated within the limits of their iurisdiction, and authority, and to punish the same by admonition, excommunication, sequestration, or deprivation, or other censures, and Processes in like form as heretofore hath been vsed in like cases, by the Queens ecclesiasticall lawes.

Provided always, and be it enacted, that whatsoever person offending in the premisses, shall for the first offence receive punishment of the Ordinary, having a testimonial thereof vnder the said Ordinaries seal, shall not for the same offence eftsoons be convicted before the Iustices : and likewise receiving for the said first offence, punishment by the Justices, he shall not for the same first offence, eftsoons receive punishment of the Ordinary : any thing contained in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it enacted, that such ornaments of the church, and of the Ministers thereof shall be retained, and be in vse, as was in this church of England by the authority of Parliament in the second year of the reign of King Edward the sixth, vntil other order shall be therein taken, by authority of the Queens Maiesty, with the advice of her Commissioners appointed and authorized vnder the; great seal of England, for causes ecclesiasticall or of the Metropolitane of this Realm. And also, that if there shall happen any contempt or irreverence to be vsed in the Ceremonies or Rites of the Church by the misvsing of the orders appointed in this book : the Queens Maiesty may by the like advice of the said Commissioners, or Metropolitane, ordain and publish such further Ceremonies or Rites, as may be most for the advancement of Gods glory, the edifying of his Church, and the due reverence of Christs holy Mysteries and sacraments.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all lawes Statutes and ordinances wherein or whereby any other service, administration of sacraments, or common prayer is limited, established, or set forth to be vsed

within this Realm, or any other the Queens Dominions and Countries shall from henceforth vtterly be voyd and of none effect.

Jt hath been the wisdom of the Church of England, ever since the first compiling of her publick Liturgie, to keep the meane between the two extreams ; of too much stiffness in refusing, and of too much easiness in admitting any variation from it. ffor as on the one side common experience sheweth, that where a change hath been made of things advisedly established, no evident necessity so requiring, sundry inconveniences have therevpon ensued, and those many times more, and greater, then the evils that were intended to be remedied by such change : So on the other side, the particular Forms of divine Worship, and the Rites and Ceremonies appointed to be vsed therein, being things in their own nature indifferent, and alterable, and so acknowledged ; it is but reasonable that vpon waighty and important considerations, according to the various exigency of times and occasions, such changes and alterations should be made therein as to those that are in place of Authority, should from time to time seem either necessary or expedient Accordingly we find that in the Reignes of severall Princes of blessed memory since the reformation, the Church vpon iust and weighty considerations her therevnto moving, hath yeilded to make such alterations in some particulars, as in their respective times were thought convenient Yet so as that the main body and essentials of it (as well in the chiefest materials, as in the frame and order thereof) have still continued the same vnto this day; and do yet stand firm and vnshaken, notwithstanding all the vain attempts, and impetuous assaults made against it by such men as are given to change, and have alwayes discovered a greater regard to their own private fancies and interests, then to that duty they ow to the publick.

By what vndue means, and for what mischievous purposes the vse of the Liturgy (though inioyned by the Lawes of the land, and those laws never yet repealed) came, during the late vnhappy confusions to be discontinued, is too well-known to the world, and we are not willing here to remember. But when vpon his Majesties happy restauration, it seemed probable, that amongst other things, the vse of the liturgy also would return of course (the same having never been legally abolished;) vnless some timely means were vsed to prevent it: those men, who vnder the late vsurped powers, had made it a great part of their business, to render the people disaffected therevnto, saw themselves in point of reputation, and interest concerned (vnless they would freely acknowledge themselves to have erred, which such men are very hardly brought to do) with their vtmost endeavors to hinder the restitution thereof. In order wherevnto divers pamphlets were published against the Book of Common-prayer, the old objections mustred vp, with the addition of some new ones, more then formerly had been made, to make the number swell. In fine, great importunities were vsed to his sacred Majesty that the said Book might be revised, and such alterations therein, and additions therevnto made, as should be thought requisite for the ease of tender consciences. Wherevnto his Maiesty out of his pious inclination to give satisfaction (so far as could be reasonably expected) to all his subjects of what perswasion soever, did gratiously condescend.

Jn which review we have endeavored to observe the like moderation as we find to have been vsed in the like case in former times ; And therefore of the sundry alterations proposed vnto vs, we have eiected all such, as were either of dangerous consequence (as secretly striking at some established doctrine, or laudable practise of the church of England, or indeed of the whole Catholick church of Christ ;) or else of no consequence at all, but vtterly frivolous and vain. But such alterations as were tendred to vs (by what persons, under what pretenses, or to what purpose soever so tendred) as seemed to vs in any degree requisite or expedient, we have willingly, and of our own accord assented vnto. Not enforced so to do by any strength of Argument convincing vs of the necessity of making the said alterations : for we are fully perswaded in our iudgements (and we here profess it to the world) that the Book, as it stood before established by Law, doth not contain in it any thing contrary to the word of God, or to sound doctrine, or which a godly man may not with a good conscience vse, and submitt vnto, or which is not fairly defensible against any that shall oppose the same; if it shall be allowed such iust and favourable construction as in common equity ought to be allowed to all humane writings, especially such as are set forth by Authority, and even to the very best translations of the holy scripture it selfe.

Our generall aime therefore in this vndertaking was, not to gratify this or that party in any their vnreasonable demands : but to do that which to our best vnderstandings we conceived might most tend to the preservation of peace and vnity in the Church ; the procuring of reverence, and exciting of piety, and devotion in the publick worship of God; and the cutting off occasion from themthat seek occasion of cavill, or quarell against the Liturgy of the Church. And as to the severall variations from the former Book, whether by alteration, addition, or otherwise : it shall suffice to give this generall account. That most of the alterations were made either ffirst, for the better direction of them that are to officiate in any part of divine service, which is chiefly don in the Kalendars, and Rubricks, or secondly for the more proper expressing of some words or phrases of antient vsage, in terms more suteable to the language of the present times ; and the clearer explanation of some other words and phrases that were either of doubtfull signification, or otherwise liable to misconstruction. Or thirdly, for a more perfect rendring of such portions of holy Scripture, as are inserted into the Liturgy : which in the Epistles and Gospells especially, and in sundry other places are now ordered to be read according to the last lation. And that it was thought convenient that some prayers and thanksgivings fitted to speciall occasions should be added in their due places, particularly for those at Sea, Together with an Office for the baptism of such as are of riper years ; (which although not so necessary when the former Book was compiled, yet by the growth of Anabaptism, through the licentiousness of the late times crept in amongst vs, is now become necessary) and may be alwayes vsefull for the baptizing of Natives in out plantations, and others converted to the Faith.

Jf any man who shall desire a more particular account of the severall alterations in any part of the Liturgie, shall take the pains to compare the present book with the former, : we doubt not, but the reason of the change may easily appear.

And having thus indeavored to discharge our duties in this weighty affair, as in the sight of God, and to approve our sincerity therein (so far as lay in vs) to the consciences of all men : Although we know it impossible (in such variety of Apprehensions, humors, and interests as are in the world) to please all ; nor can expect that men of factious, peevish, and perverse spirits should be satisfied with any thing that can be don in this kind, by any other then themselves : Yet we have good hope, that what is here presented, and hath been by the Convocations of both Provinces with great diligence examined and approved; will be also well accepted and approved by all sober, peaceable, and truly conscientious Sons of the Church of England.

There was never any thing by the wit of man so well devised, or so sure established, which in continuance of time hath not been corrupted: as, among other things it may plainly appear by the Common Prayers in the Church, commonly called divine service. The first original and ground whereof if a man would search out by the ancient Fathers he shall find that the same was not ordeined, but of a good purpose, and for a great advancement of godliness. For they so ordered the matter, that all the whole Bible (or the greatest part thereof) should be read over once every year: intending thereby, that the Clergie, and especially such as were Ministers in the Congregation should (by often reading and meditation in Gods word) be stirred vp to godliness themselves, and be more able to exhort others by wholesom doctrine, and to confute them that were Adversaries to the Truth. And further that the people (by daily hearing of holy Scripture read in the Church) might continually profit more and more in the knowledge of God and be the more inflamed with the love of his true Religion.

But these many years passed this godly and decent order of the ancient Fathers hath been so altered, broken, and neglected by planting in vncertein Stories and Legends, with multitude of Responds, Verses, vain repetitions, Commemorations, and Synodals; that commonly when any book of the bible was begun, after three or four chapters were read out, all the rest were vnread. And in this sort, the book of Esay was begun in Advent, and the book of Genesis in septuagesima: but they were only begun, and never read through. After like sort were other books of holy scripture vsed.

And moreover, whereas Saint Paul would have such language spoken to the people in the church, as they might vnderstand, and have profit by hearing the same: the service in this churche of England these many years hath been read in latine to the people, which they vnderstand not; so that they have heard with their ears only, and their heart spirit and mind have not been edified thereby.

And furthermore notwithstanding that the ancient Fathers have divided the Psalms into seaven portions, whereof every one was called a Nocturn: now of late time a few of them have been daily said, and the rest vtterly omitted.

Moreover the number and hardnes of the rules, called the Pie, and the manifold changings of the service, was the cause that to turn the book only was so hard and intricate a matter, that many times there was more busines to find out what should be read, then to read it, when it was found out.

These inconveniences therefore considered, here is set forth such an order, whereby the same shall be redressed. And for a readiness in this matter, here is drawn out a Kalendar for that purpose, which is plain and easie to be vnderstood; wherein (so much as may be) the reading of holy scripture is so set forth that all things shall be don in order, without breaking one piece from another. For this cause be cutt off Anthemes, Responds, Invitatories, and such like things as did break the continual course of the reading of the Scripture.

Yet because there is no Remedy, but that of necessity there must be some Rules: therefore certein Rules are here set forth; which, as they are few in number, so they are plain, and easie to be vnderstood. So that here you haue an Order for prayer, and for the reading of the holy Scripture, much agreable to the mind and purpose of the old Fathers, and a great deal more profitable, and commodious then that, which of late was vsed. It is more profitable; because here are left out many things, whereof some are vntrue, some vncertein, some vain and superstitious; and nothing is ordeined to be read, but the very pure word of God, the holy Scriptures, or that which is agreeable to the same; and that in such a language and order as is most easie and plain for the vnderstanding both of the readers and hearers. It is also more commodious; both for the shortness thereof, and for the plainness of the order, and for that the rules be few and easy.

And whereas heretofore there hath been great diversity in saying, and singing in Churches within this Realm; some following Salisbury vse, some Hereford vse, and some the vse of Bangor, some of York, some of Lincoln; now from henceforth all the whole realme shall have but one vse.

And for as much as nothing can be so plainly set forth, but doubts may arise in the vse and practise of the same: to appease all such diversity (if any arise) and for the resolution of all doubts concerning the manner how to vnderstand, do and execute the things contained in this book; The parties that so doubt or diversly take any thing, shall alway resort to the Bishop of the Diocess, who by his discretion shall take order for the quieting and appeasing of the same; so that the same order be not contrary to any thing contained in this book. And if the Bishop of the Diocess be in doubt; then he may send for the Resolution thereof to the Arch-Bishop.

Though it be appointed that all things shall be read and sung in the Church, in the english tongue, to the end that the congregation may be thereby edified: Yet it is not meant, but that when men say Morning and Evening Prayer privatly, they may say the same in any Language that they themselves do vnderstand.

And all Priests and Deacons are to say daily the Morning and Evening Prayer, either privatly, or openly, not being let by sickness or some other vrgent cause.

And the Curate that ministreth in every parish church or Chappel being at home, and not being otherwise reasonably hindred, shall say the same in the parish church or chappel where he ministreth, and shall cause a Bell to be tolled there vnto a convenient time before he begin; that the people may come to hear Gods word, and to pray with him.

Of Ceremonies, Why some be abolished and some retained.

Of such Ceremonies as be vsed in the Church, and have had their beginning- by the Jnstitution of man, some at the first were of godly intent and purpose devised, and yet at length turned to vanity and superstition: some entred into the Church by vndiscreet devotion, and such a Zeale as was without knowledge ; and for because they were winked at in the begining they grew daily to more and more abuses which not only for their vnprofitableness, but also because they have much blinded the people, and obscured the glory of God, are worthy to be cut away and clean rejected. Other there be, which although they have been devised by man, yet it is thought good to reserve them still, as well for a decent order in the Church (for the which they were first devised) as because they pertain to edification, wherevnto all things done in the church (as the Apostle teacheth) ought to be referred. And although the keeping or omitting of a Ceremony, in it self considered, is but a small thing, yet the wilfiill and contemptuous transgression and breaking of a common order and discipline is no small offence before God.

Let all things be don among you, saith S. Paul, in a seemly and due order. The appointment of the which order pertaineth not to private men: therefore no man ought to take in hand, nor presume to appoint or alter any publick, or common order in Christs church, except he be lawfully called and authorized thereunto.

And whereas in this our time, the minds of men are so divers, that some think it a great matter of conscience to depart from a peece of the least of their Ceremonies; they be so addicted to their old customs : and again on the other side, some be so newfangled, that they would innovate all things, and so despise the old, that nothing can like them but that is new: Jt was thought expedient, not so much to have respect how to please and satisfie either of these parties, as how to please God and profitt them both. And yet lest any man should be offended, whom good reason might satisfie, here be certein causes rendred why some of the accustomed Ceremonies be put away, and some retained, and kept still. Some are put away because the great excess and multitude of them hath so increased in these latter dayes, that the burthen of them was intolerable; whereof S. Augustine in his tyme complained that they were grown to such a number, that the estate of Christian people was in worse case concerning that matter, then were the Iews. And he counselled that such yoke and burthen should be taken away, as time would serve quietly to do it.

But what would S. Augustine have said, if he had seen the Ceremonies of late daies vsed among vs: whereunto the multitude vsed in his time was not to be compared? This our excessive multitude of Ceremonies was so great, and many of them so dark, that they did more confound and darken, then declare and sett forth Christs benefits vnto vs. And besides this, Christs Gospell is not a ceremoniall law, (as much of Moses law was) but it is a Religion, to serve God, not in bondage of the figure, or shadow, but in the freedom of the spirit, being content only with those ceremonies which do serve to a decent order, and godly discipline, and such as be apt to stir up the dull mind of man to the remembrance of his duty to God, by some notable and speciall signification, whereby he might be edified.

Furthermore, the most weighty cause of the abolishment of certain Ceremonies was, that they were so far abused, partly by the superstitious blindsess of the rude, and vnlearned, and partly by the vnsatiable avarice of such as sought more their own lucre, then the glory of God ; that the abuses could not well be taken away, the thing remaining still. But now, as concerning those persons which peradventure will be offended, for that some of the old ceremonies are retained still: if they consider that without some ceremonies it is not possible to keep any order or quiet discipline in the Church, they shall easily perceive iust cause to reform their iudgements. And if they think much that any of the old do remain, and would rather have all devised anew: then such men granting some ceremonies convenient to be had; surely where the old may be well vsed, there they cannot reasonably reprove the old, only for their age, without bewraying of their own folly. For in such a case they ought rather to have reverence vnto them for their antiquitie: if they will declare themselves to be more studious of vnitie and concord, then of innovations, and newfangleness, which (as much as may be with the true setting forth of Christs religion) is alwayes to be eschewed. Furthermore such shall have no iust cause with the Ceremonies reserved to be offended. For as those be taken away which were most abused, and did burden mens consciences without any cause; so the other that remain, are retained for a discipline and order, which (vpon iust causes) may be altered and changed, and therefore are not to be esteemed equall with Gods law. And moreover they be neither dark nor dumb ceremonies, but are so set forth, that every man may vnderstand what they do mean, and to what vse they do serve. So that it is not like that they in time to come should be abused, as other have been. And in these our doings we condemn no other Nations, nor prescribe any thing, but to our own people only. For we think it convenient that every country should vse such ceremonies as they shall think best to the setting forth of Gods honour and glory, and to the reducing of the people to a most perfect and godly living without errour or superstition: And that they should put away other things, which from time to time they perceive to be most abused, as in mens ordinances it often chanceth diversly in divers countries.

The Order how the Psalter

is appointed to be read.

The Psalter shall be read through once every month, as it is there appointed, both for Morning and Evening Prayer. But in February it shall be read onely to the twenty eighth or twenty ninth day of the month.

And, whereas January, March, May, July, August, October and December have one and thirty dayes a peece; Jt is ordered that the same Psalms shall be read the last day of the said Monthes which were read the day before: So that the Psalter may begin again the first day of the next month ensuing.

And, whereas the cxix. psalm is divided into xxii. portions, and is overlong to be read at one time: Jt is so ordered, that at one time shall not be read above four or five of the said portions.

And at the end of every Psalm, and of every such part of the cxix Psalm shall be repeated this Hymn

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be; world without end. Amen.

Note, that the Psalter followeth the division of the Hebrews, and the Translation of the great English Bible, set forth and vsed in the time of K. H. viii. and Edw. vi.

The Order how the rest of

Holy Scripture is appointed to be read.

The Old Testament is appointed for the first Lessons at Morning, and Evening Prayer; so as the most part thereof will be read every year once as in the Kalendar is appointed.

The New Testament is appointed for the second Lessons at Morning and Evening Prayer, and shall be read over orderly every year thrice, besides the Epistles and Gospels; except the Apocalyps, out of which there are only certein proper Lessons appointed vpon divers Feasts.

And to know what Lessons shall be read every day, looke for the day of the month in the Kalendar following; and there ye shall find the Chapters that shall be read for the Lessons, both at morning and evening Prayer. Except only the Moveable Feasts, which are not in the Kalendar; and the Jmoveable, where there is a blank left in the Column of Lessons; The proper Lessons for all which dayes are to be found in the Table of Proper Lessons.

And note, that whensoever proper Psalms, or Lessons are appointed; then the Psalms and Lessons of ordinary course appointed in the Psalter, and Kalendar (if they be different) shall be omitted for that time.

Note also, that the Collect, Epistle, and Gospel appointed for the Sunday, shall serve all the week after, where it is not in this book otherwise ordered.

Proper Lessons to be read at

Morning and Evening Prayer on the

Sundayes, & other Holy-daies throughout the year.

Stsphsn.

1. Lssson.

Prov. xxviii

Ecctss. iv.

2. Lssson.

Acts. 6. vr. 8. & c.7. to vr. 30.

Acts. 7. vr. 30. to vr. 55.

S. John.

1. Lssson.

Ecctss. v.

Ecctss.vi.

2. Lssson.

Apoc. i.

Apoc. xxii.

Innocsnts day.

Jsr. xxxi. to vr. 18.

Wisd. i.

Curcnmcision.

1. Lssson.

Gsn. xvii.

Dsnt. x. vr. 12.

2. Lssson.

Rom. ii.

Coloss. ii

Epiphanie.

1. Lssson.

Isai. lx.

Isai. xlix.

2. Lesson.

Luks. 3. to vr. 23

Ioh. 2. to vr. 12.

Conversion of S. Paul.

1. Lssson.

Wisd. v.

Wisd. vi.

2. Lesson.

Acts. 22. to vr. 22.

Acts. xxvi.

Purification of the Virg. Mary

Wisd. ix

Wisd. xii.

S. Matthias.


XIX


Eccl̃us. 1.

Añnnciation of our Ladie

Ecct̃us. ii


III


Wsdesday bsfore Easter.

1. Lssson.

Hos. xiii.

Hos. xiv.

2. Lssson.

Ioh. xi. vr. 45.

Thnrsday bsfore Easter.

1. Lssson.

Dan. ix

Jerem. xxxi.

2. Lssson.

Joh. xiii

Good-Friday

1. Lssson.

Gon. 22. to vr. 20

Isai. liii.

2. Lssson.

Ioh. xi. vr. 45.

Easter Evon

1. Lssson.

Zsch. ix

Exod. xiii.

2. Lssson.

Luks. 23. vr. 50

Hsbr. iv

Mnnday in Easter wssk

1. Lssson.

Exod. xvi.

Exod. xvii.

2. Lssson.

Matth. xxviii

Acts. iii.

Tuesday in Easter wssk

1. Lssson.

Exod. xx.

Exod. xxxii.

2. Lssson.

Luks. 24. to vr. 13

1. Cor. xv.

S. Mark.

Ecct̃us. iv

Ecct̃us. v

S. Philip. and S. Iacob.

1. Lssson.


VII



IX


2. Lssson.

Ioh. 1. vr. 43

Asssnsion day.

1. Lssson.

Deut. x.

2. King. ii.

2. Lssson.

Luks. 24. vr. 44.

Eph: 4. to vr. 17.

Mnnday in Whitsnn Wssk

1. Lssson.

Gen. xi. to vr. 10.

Num. xi. vr. 16. to vr. 30.

2. Lssson.

1. Cor. 24. vr. 44.

1. Cor. 14. to vr. 26

Tuesday in Whitsun Wssk

1. Lesson.


I. SAM. 19. VR. 18.


Deut. xxx.

2. Lesson.


I. THESS. V. VR. 12. TO VR. 24


1. Joh. iv. to vr. 14.

S. Barnabas

1. Lssson.

Eccl͊us. x.

Ecct͊us. xii.

2. Lssson.

Acts: xiv

Acts. 15. to vr. 36.

S. Iohn Baptist

1. Lssson.

Malach. iii

Malach. iv

2. Lssson.

Matth. iii

Matth. 14. to vr. 13

S. Pster

1. Lssson.

Eccl͊us. xv

Eccl͊us. xix

2. Lssson.

Acts. iii

Acts. iv

S. James.

Eccl͊us. xxi

Eccl͊us. xxii

S. Bartholomew.


XXIV



XXIX


S. Matthew.

Ecct͊us. xxxv

Ecct͊us. xxxviii

S. Michaet

1. Lssson.

Gen. xxxii

Dan. x. vr. 5.

2. Lesson.

Acts. 12. to vr. 20

Jude. vr. 6. to vr. 16.

S. Luks.

Eccl͊us. li.

Job: i.

S. Simon and S. Jude

Job. xxiv. xxv.


XLII.


All saints

1. Lssson.

Wisd. iii to vr. 10.

Wisd. v. to vr. 17.

2. Lesson.

Hebr. xi. vr. 33 & c. 12. to vr. 7.

Apoc. vr. xix. to vr. 17.

Proper Psalms on certein Daies.


XLV LXXXV


lxxxix cx. cxxxii

¶ Ash-Wedensday

vi xxxii. xxxviii

cii. cxxx cxliii.

¶ Good Friday

xxii xl liv.


LXIX LXXXVIII.


¶ Easter day

ii ivii cxi.

cxiii cxiv cxvii

¶ Ascension day

viii xv xxi.

xxiv xivii cviii

¶ Whitsunday


XIVIII LXVIII



CIV CXLV.


Tables, and Rules for

the Moveable and Jmmoveable

Feasts; together with

The daies of Fasting and

Abstinence through the

whole year.

Rules to know when the Moveable Feasts, and Holy-dayes begin.

Easter-Day, (on which the rest depend) is always the first Sunday after the first full Moon, which happens next after the one and twentith day of March. And if the full Moon happens vpon a Sunday, Easter day is the Sunday after.

Advent Sunday is alwaies the nearest Sunday to the Feast of Saint Andrew, whether before or after.

Sexagesima Quinquagesima Quadragesima

}

Sunday is

{

9. 8. 7. 6.

}

Weeks before Easter.

Ascension day Whitsunday Trinitie Sunday

}

is

{

5. weeks 40. daies 7. weeks 8. weeks

}

after Easter.

A Table of all the Feasts that are to be observed in the Church of England through the year.

The Epiphany. The Conversion of S. Paul. The purification of the blessed Virgin. Saint Matthias the Apostle. The Añunciation of the Blessed Virgin. S. Mark the Evangelist. S. Philip, and S. Jacob the Apostles. The Ascension of our Lord Iesus Christ. S. Barnabas. The Nativity of S. John Baptist. S. Peter the Apostle. S. James the Apostle. S. Bartholmew the Apostle. S. Matthew the Apostle. S. Michael and all Angels. S. Luke the Evangelist. S. Simon, and S. Jude the Apostles. All Saints. S. Andrew the Apostle. S. Thomas the Apostle. The Nativity of our Lord S. Stephen the Martyr. S. John the Evangelist The holy Innocents Monday and Tuesday in Easter week. Monday and Tuesday in Whitsun week.

A Table of the Vigils, Fasts, and Daies of Abstinence to be observed in the year

The Purification of the blessed virgin Mary.

The Annunciation of the blessed Virgin.

Easter day.

Ascension day.

Pentecost

S. Matthias.

S. John Baptist

S. Peter.

S. James.

S. Bartholmew.

S. Matthew.

S. Simon and S. Iude.

S. Andrew.

S. Thomas

All Saints

Note, that if any of these Feast-daies fall vpon a Monday, then the Vigil, or Fast-day shall be kept vpon the Saturday, and not vpon the Sunday next before it.

Dates of Fasting, or Abstinence.

The fortie daies of Lent

The Ember daies at the foure seasons; being the

the feast of Pentecost Septemb. 14. Decemb. 13.

The three Rogation daies being the Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday before Holy Thursday, or the Ascension of our Lord.

All the Fridayes in the year; Except Christmas day.

Certain solemn dayes, for which particular services are appointed.

The 5. day of November, being the day of the Papists Conspiracy.

The 30. day of January, being the day of the Martyrdom of King Charles the first

The 29. day of May, being the day of the birth, and return of King Charles the second.

A Table of the Moveable Feasts calculated for forty years.

A table should appear at this position in the text. See Help:Table for formatting instructions.

Note, that the Suppulation of the year of our Lord in the Church of England beginneth the 25. day of March.

To finde Easter for ever.

¶ When ye have found the Sunday Letter in the uppermost line, guide your eye downwards from the same till you come right over against the Prime, and there is shewed both what moneth, and what day of the month Easter falleth that year. But note that the name of the Moneth is set at the left hand, or els iust with the figure,; and followeth not as in other Tables by descent, but collaterall.

Layout 2

sister projects: Wikidata item

The Order for

Morning and Evening Prayer daily to be said and vsed throughout the year.

The Morning and Evening Prayer shall be vsed in the accustomed place of the Church, Chappel, or Chancel; except it shall be otherwise determined by the Ordinarie of the place. And the Chancels shall remain as they have done in times past.

And heere is to be noted, That such Ornaments of the Church, and of the Ministers thereof at all times of their Ministration, shall be retained, and be in vse, as were in this Church of England by the authoritie of Parliament, in the second year of the raigne of King Edw. vi

The Order for Morning Prayer dayly

throughout the year.

¶

At the beginning of Morning Prayer, the Minister shall read with a loud voice, some one, or more of these sentences of the scriptures that follow. And then he shall say that which is written after the said sentences.

Ezech. 18. 27.When the wicked man turneth away from his wickedness that he hath committed, and doth that which is lawfull and right, he shall save his soul alive.

Psal. 51. 3.I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me.

Psal. 51. 9.Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out mine iniquities.

Psal. 51. 17.The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, a broken, and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.

Joel. 2. 13.Rent your hearts, and not your garments, and turn vnto the Lord your God; for he is gracious and mercifull, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repenteth him of the evil.

Dan. 9. 9, 10.To the Lord our God belong mercies, and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against him: Neither have we obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in his Laws which he set before vs.

Jer: 10. 24 Psal. 6. 1O Lord correct me, but with iudgement; not in thine anger, lest thou bring me to nothing.

S. Mat. 3. 2.Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

S. Luke 15. 18, 19.I will arise, and go to my father, and will say vnto him: Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son.

Psal. 143. 2Enter not into iudgement with thy servant [O Lord] for in thy sight shall no man living be iustified.

1. S. John. 1. 8, 9.If we say, that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in vs: [But] if we confess our sins, he is faithfull and iust to forgive vs our sinns, and to cleanse vs from all vnrighteousness.

Dearly beloved brethren, the scripture moveth vs in sundry places to acknowledge, and confess our manifold sins and wickednes, and that we should not dissemble nor cloak them before the face of Almighty God our heavenly father; but confess them with an humble lowly penitent, and obedient heart, to the end that we may obtein forgivenes of the same by his infinite goodnes and mercy. And although we ought at all times humbly to acknowledge our sins before God, yet ought we most chiefly so to do, when we assemble and meet together to render thanks for the great benefits that we have received at his hands, to set forth his most worthy praise, to hear his most holy word, and to aske those things which are requisite and necessary as well for the body as the soul. Wherefore I pray and beseech you, as many as are here present, to accompany me with a pure heart, and humble voice, vnto the throne of the heavenly grace, saying after me

¶

A generall Confession to be said of the whole congregation, after the Minister, all kneeling.

Almighty and most mercifull Father, We have erred and strayed from thy wayes like lost sheep, We have followed too much the devices and desires of our own hearts, We have offended against thy holy laws, We have left vndon those things which we ought to have don, And we have don those things which we ought not to have don, And there is no health in vs: But thou, O Lord, have mercy vpon vs miserable offenders; Spare thou them, O God, which confess their faults, Restore thou them that are penitent, According to thy promises declared vnto mankind, in Christ Jesu our Lord: And grant most mercifull father, for his sake, That we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober life, To the glory of thy holy Name. Amen.

¶

The Absolution, or Remission of sins to be pronounced by the Priest alone, standing, the people still kneeling.

Almighty God, the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, who desireth not the death of a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his wickedness, and live; and hath given power and commandment to his ministers to declare, and pronounce to his people being penitent, the absolution and remission of their sins: He pardoneth, and absolveth all them that truly repent, and vnfeignedly believe his holy Gospel. Wherefore let us beseech him to grant vs true repentance, and his holy spirit, that those things may please him which we do, at this present, and that the rest of our life hereafter may be pure and holy, so that at the last we may come to his eternall ioy, through Iesus Christ our Lord.

The people shall answer here, and at the end of all other prayers. Amen

¶

Then the Minister shall kneel and say the Lords Prayer with an audible voice: the people also kneeling, and repeating it with him, both here, and wheresoever else it is vsed in divine service.

Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name, Thy kingdom come, Thy will be don in earth as it is in heaven, Give vs this day our daily bread: And forgive vs our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against vs: And lead vs not into temptation, But deliver vs from evil. For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory, For ever and ever. Amen.

¶

Then likewise he shall say.

O Lord, open thou our lips.

Answer.

And our mouth shall shew forth thy praise.

Priest.

O God, make speed to save vs.

Answer.

O Lord make hast to help vs.

¶

Here, all standing vp, the Priest shall say.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost.

Answer.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Priest.

Praise ye the Lord.

Answer.

The Lords name be praised.

¶

Then shall be said or sung this Psalm following: Except on Easter Day, vpon which another Anthem is appointed; and on the nineteenth day of every moneth it is not to be read here, but in the ordinary course of the Psalms.

Venite exultemus Domino. Psal. 95.O come, let vs sing vnto the Lord : let vs heartily reioyce in the strength of our salvation

Let vs come before his presence with thanksgiving : and shew our selves glad in him with Psalms.

For the Lord is a great God : and a great King above all Gods.

In his hand are all the Corners of the Earth : and the strength of the Hills is his alsoe.

The sea is his, and he made it : and his hands prepared the dry Land.

O come, let vs worship, and fall downe : and kneel before the Lord our Maker.

For he is the Lord our God : and we are the people of his pasture and the sheepe of his hand. To day if ye will heare his voyce, harden not your hearts : as in the provocation, and as in the day of temptation in the wilderness.

When your fathers tempted mee : proved me and saw my works.

Forty yeares long was I grieved with this generation and said : it is a people that do erre in their hearts, for they have not known my wayes.

Vnto whom I sware in my wrath : that they should not enter into my rest.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son : and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be : world without end. Amen.

„ ¶ Then shall follow the Psalms in order as they be appointed. And at the end of every Psalm throughout the yeare, and likewise in the end of Benedicite, Benedictus, Magnificat, and Nunc dimittis shall be repeated.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son : and to the holy Ghost.

„ Answer.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be : world without end. Amen.

„ ¶ Then shall be read distinctly with an audible voice, the first Lesson, taken out of the old Testament as is appointed in the Kalender. Except there be proper Lessons assigned for that day. He that readeth so standing and turning himself, as he may best be heard of all such as are present; And after that, shall be said or sung in English, the Hymn called Te Deum laudamus, daily throughout the yeare.

„ ¶ Note that before every Lesson the Minister shall say, Here beginneth such a Chapter, or verse of such a chapter of such a Book. And after every Lesson, Here endeth the first, or the second Lesson.

Te Deum laudamus.We praise thee, O God: we acknowledge thee to be the Lord.

All the Earth doth worship thee: the Father everlasting.

To thee all Angells cry aloud: the heavens and all the powers therein.

To thee Cherubin and Seraphin: continually do cry. Holy, holy, holy: Lord God of Sabbaoth.

Heaven and earth are full of the Majesty glory.

The glorious Company of the Apostles thee.

The goodly fellowship of the Prophets: praise thee.

The noble army of Martyrs: praise thee.

The holy Church throughout all the world acknowledge thee.

The Father: of an infinite Majesty.

Thine honourable, true: and only Son.

Also the holy Ghost: the Comforter.

Thou art the king of glory: O Christ.

Thou art the everlasting son: of the Father.

When thou tookest vpon thee to deliver thou didst not abhor the Virgins Womb.

When thou hadst overcome the sharpness of Death: thou didst open the kingdom of heaven to all beleevers.

Thou sittest at the right hand of God: in the glory of the Father.

Wee believe that thou shalt come: to be our Iudge. We therefore pray thee help thy servants: whom thou hast redeemed with thy precious blood.

Make them to be numbred with thy Saints: in glory everlasting. O Lord save thy people: and bless thine heritage.

Govern them: and lift them vp for ever.

Day by Day: we magnifie thee. And we worship thy name: ever world without end. Vouchsafe, (O Lord:) to keep vs this day without sin.

O Lord have mercy vpon vs: have mercy vpon vs.

O Lord let thy mercy lighten vpon vs: as our trust is in thee.

O Lord in thee have I trusted: let me never be confounded.

¶ Or this Canticle, Benedicite omnia opera.

O All ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnifie him forever.

O ye Angels of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnifie him forever.

O ye heavens, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnifie him for ever.

O ye waters that be above the firmament, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnifie him for ever.

O all ye powers of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnifie him for ever.

O ye Sun and Moon, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnifie him for ever.

O ye stars of heaven, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnifie him for ever.

O ye showers and deaw, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnifie him for ever.

O ye winds of God, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnifie him for ever.

O ye fire, and heat, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnifie him for ever.

O ye winter and summer, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnifie him for ever.

O ye deaws, and frosts, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnifie him for ever.

O ye frost and cold, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnifie him for ever.

O ye yce, and snow, bless ye the Lord : praise him and magnifie him for ever.

O ye nights and daies, bless ye the Lord : praise him, and magnifie him for ever.

O ye light, and darkness, bless ye the Lord : praise him and magnifie him for ever.

O ye lightnings, and clouds, bless ye the Lord : praise him, and magnifie him for ever.

O Let the earth bless the Lord : yea, let it praise him, and magnifie him for ever.

O ye mountains and hills, bless ye the Lord : praise him and magnifie him for ever.

O all ye green things vpon the earth, bless ye the Lord : praise him and magnifie him for ever.

O ye wells, bless ye the Lord : praise him, and magnifie him for ever.

O ye seas and floods, bless ye the Lord : praise him and magnifie him for ever.

O ye whales, and all that move in the waters, bless ye the Lord : praise him and magnifie him for ever.

O all ye fowles of the aire bless ye the Lord : praise him, and magnifie him for ever.

O all ye beasts and cattell, bless ye the Lord : praise him, and magnifie him for ever.

O ye children of men, bless ye the Lord : praise him, and magnifie him for ever.

O let Israel bless the Lord : praise him, and magnifie him for ever.

O ye Priests of the Lord, bless ye the Lord : praise him and magnifie him for ever.

O ye servants of the Lord, bless ye the Lord : praise him and magnifie him for ever.

O ye spirits, and souls of the righteous, bless ye the Lord : praise him, and magnifie him for ever.

O ye holy, and humble men of heart, bless ye the Lord : praise him and magnifie him for ever.

O Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, bless ye the Lord : praise him, and magnifie him for ever.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son : and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be : world without end, Amen.

¶ Then shall be read in like mañer the second Lesson taken out of the New Testament, And after that the Hymn following (except when that shall happen to be read in the chapter for the day, or for the Gospel on saint John Baptist's Day.)

Benedictus. S. Luke, 1.68 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel : for he hath visited, and redeemed his people.

And hath raised vp a mighty salvation for vs : in the house of his servant David.

As he spake by the mouth of his holy Prophets : which have been since the world began.

That we should be saved from our enemies : and from the hands of all that hate vs.

To perform the mercy promised to our forefathers : and to remember his holy covenant.

To perform the oath which he sware to our forefather Abraham : that he would give vs.

That we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies : might serve him without fear.

Jn holines, and righteousnes before him : all the dayes of our life.

And thou child shalt be called the Prophet of the Highest : for thou shalt go before the face of the Lord to prepare his wayes.

To give knowledge of salvation vnto his people : for the remission of their sins.

Through the tender mercy of our God : whereby the day-spring from on high hath visited vs.

To give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death : and to guide our feet into the way of peace.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son : and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be : world without end. Amen.

¶ Or this Psalm.

Jubilate Deo. O be ioyfull in the Lord all ye Lands : serve the Lord with gladnes, and come before his presence with a song.

Be ye sure that the Lord he is God : it is he that hath made vs, and not we our selves, we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.

O go your way into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with praise : be thankfull vnto him, and speak good of his Name.

For the Lord is gratious, his mercy is everlasting : and his truth endureth from generation to generation.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son : and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be : world without end. Amen.

¶ Then shall be sung, or said, the Apostles Creed, by the Minister and the people standing : Except only such Dayes as the Creed of saint Athanasius is appointed to be read.

I believe in God, the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth: And in Iesus Christ his only Son our Lord, Who was conceived by the holy Ghost, Born of the virgin Mary, Suffered vnder Pontius Pilate, Was cruciﬁed, dead and buried. He descended into Hell, The third day he rose again from the dead. He ascended into Heaven, And sitteth on the right hand of God the Father Almighty. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the holy ghost, The holy Catholick Churche, The Com̄union of Saints, the forgiveness of sins, The resurrection of the body, And the life everlasting. Amen.

¶ And after that, these praiers following, all devoutly kneeling, the Minister first pronouncing with a loud voice. The Lord be with you.

Answer.

And with thy Spirit.

Minister.

¶ Let vs pray.

Lord have mercy vpon vs.

Christ haue mercy vpon vs.

Lord have mercy vpon vs.

¶ Then the Minister, Clerks and people shall say the Lord's prayer with a loud voice.

Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdome come. Thy will be don in Earth as it is in heaven. Give vs this day our dayly bread. And forgive vs our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against vs. And lead vs not into temptation : But deliver vs from evill. Amen.

¶ Then the Priest standing vp, shall say.

O Lord shew thy mercy vpon vs.

Answer.

And grant vs thy salvation.

Priest.

O Lord save the King.

Answer.

And mercifully heare vs when we call vpon thee.

Priest.

Indue thy Ministers with righteousness.

Answer.

And make thy chosen people ioyfull.

Priest.

O Lord save thy people.

Answer.

And bless thine Inheritance.

Priest.

Give peace in our time, o Lord

Answer.

Because there is none other that fighteth for vs, but only thou, O God.

Priest.

O God make cleane our hearts within vs.

Answer.

And take not thy holy Spirit from vs.

¶ Then shall follow three Collects. The first of the day, which shall be the same that is appointed at the Com̅union. The second for Peace. The third for grace to live well. And the two last Collects shall never alter, but daily be said at Morning Prayer throughout all the year, as followeth, All kneeling.

¶ The second Collect for Peace.

O God who art the Author of peace, and lover of Concord, in knowledge of whom standeth our eternall life, whose service is perfect freedom : defend vs thy humble servants in all assaults of our enemies, that we surely trusting in thy defence, may not fear the power of any Adversaries through the might of Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

¶ The third Collect for Grace.

O Lord our heavenly Father, Almighty and everlasting God, who hast safely brought vs to the beginning of this day, defend vs in the same with thy mighty power, and grant that this day we fall into no sin, neither run into any kind of danger: but that all our doings may be ordered by thy governance, to do allwayes that is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

¶ In Quires and places where they sing here followeth the Anthem. Then these five Prayers following are to be read here, Except when the Litany is read: and then only the two last are to be read, as they are there placed.

A Prayer for the Kings Majesty.

O Lord our heavenly Father, high and mighty, King of Kings, Lord of Lords, the only ruler of Princes, who dost from thy throne behold all the dwellers vpon earth: most heartily we beseech thee with thy favour to behold our most gracious soveraign Lord King Charles, and so replenish him with the grace of thy holy Spirit, that he may alway incline to thy will, and walk in thy way. Indue him plenteously with heavenly gifts; grant him in health, and wealth long to live; strengthen him that he may vanquish and overcome all his enemies; and finally after this life he may attain everlasting ioy, and felicity, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

¶ A Prayer for

Almighty God, the fountain of all goodnes, we humbly beseech thee to bless Indue them with thy holy spirit, enrich them with thy heavenly grace, prosper them with all happiness, and bring them to thine everlasting kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

¶ A Prayer for the Clergy and people.

Almighty and everlasting God, who alone workest great marvels, send down vpon our Bishops and Curats, and all congregations committed to their charge the healthfull spirit of thy grace: and that they may truly please thee, pour vpon them the continuall dew of thy blessing: grant this, O Lord, for the honour of our Advocate, and Mediatour Iesus Christ. Amen.

¶ A Prayer of Saint Chrysostome.

Almighty God, who hast given vs grace at this time with one accord to make our common supplications vnto thee, and do'st promise that when two or three are gathered together in thy Name, thou wilt grant their Requests: fulfill now, O Lord, the desires, and petitions of thy servants, as may be most expedient for them, granting vs in this world knowledge of thy truth and in the world to come life everlasting. Amen.

2. Corinthians 13.

The grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of the holy Ghost, be with vs all evermore. Amen.

Here endeth the Order of Morning Prayer throughout the year.

Layout 2

The Order for Evening Prayer dayly

throughout the year.

¶ At the beginning of Evening Prayer the Minister shall read with a loud voice, some one or more of these sentences of the scriptures that follow. And then he shall say that which is written after the said sentences.

Ezech. 18. 27.When the wicked man turneth away from his wickedness that he hath committed, and doth that which is lawfull and right, he shall save his soul alive.

Psal. 51. 3.I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me.

Psal. 51. 9.Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out mine iniquities.

Psal. 51. 17.The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.

Joel. 2. 13.Rent your hearts, and not your garments, and turn vnto the Lord your God, for he is gracious, and mercifull, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repenteth him of the evil.

Dan. 9. 9, 10.To the Lord our God belong mercies, and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against him: Neither have we obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in his laws which he set before vs.

Jer. 10. 24. Psal. 6. 1.O Lord, correct me, but with iudgement, not in thine anger, lest thou bring me to nothing.

S. Matt. 3. 2.Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

S. Luke. 15. 18, 19. I will arise, and go to my father, and will say vnto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son.

Psal. 143. 2. Enter not into iudgement with thy servant, [O Lord] for in thy sight shall no man living be iustified.

1. S. John. 1. 8, 9. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in vs. [but] if we confess our sins, he is faithfull and iust to forgive vs our sins, and to cleanse vs from all vnrighteousness.

Dearly beloved brethren, the scripture moveth vs in sundry places to acknowledge and confess our manifold sins and wickedness, and that we should not dissemble nor cloak them before the face of Almighty God our heavenly Father, but confess them with an humble, lowly, penitent, and obedient heart, to the end that we may obtein forgiveness of the same by his infinite goodness and mercy; And although we ought at all times humbly to acknowledge our sins before God: yet ought we most chiefly so to do, when we assemble and meet together, to render thanks for the great benefits that we have received at his hands, to set forth his most worthy praise, to hear his most holy word, and to ask those things which are requisite and necessary as well for the body as the soul. Wherefore I pray and beseech you, as many as are here present, to accompany me with a pure heart, and humble voice vnto the throne of the heavenly grace, saying after me.

¶ A generall Confession to be said of the whole congregation, after the Minister, all kneeling.

Almighty, and most mercifull Father, We have erred and strayed from thy wayes like lost sheep, We have followed too much the devices, and desires of our own hearts, We have offended against thy holy laws, We have left vndon those things which we ought to have don, And we have don those things which we ought not to have don, And there is no health in vs, But thou, O Lord, have mercy vpon vs miserable offenders; Spare thou them, O God, which confess their faults, Restore thou them that are penitent, According to thy promises declared vnto mankind in Christ Iesu our Lord; And grant, O most mercifull Father, for his sake, That we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober life, To the glory of thy holy Name. Amen.

¶ The Absolution, or Remission of sins, to be pronounced by the Priest alone, standing, the people still kneeling.

Almighty God, the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, who desireth not the death of a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his wickednes and live; and hath given power and commandment to his Ministers, to declare, and pronounce to his people being penitent the Absolution, and Remission of their sins: He pardoneth and absolveth all them that truly repent and vnfeignedly believe his holy Gospel. Wherefore beseech we him to grant vs true repentance and his holy Spirit, that those things may please him which we do at this present, and that the rest of our life hereafter may be pure and holy, so that at the last we may come to his eternall ioy, throug Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

¶ Then the Minister shall kneel and say the Lords Prayer: the people also kneeling and repeating it with him.

Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come, Thy will be don in earth as it is in heaven. Give vs this day our daily bread, And forgive vs our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against vs, And lead vs not into temptation, But deliver vs from evil, For thine is the kingdom, The power, and the glory, For ever and ever. Amen.

¶ Then

¶ Then likewise he shall say.

O Lord open thou our lips.

Answer.

And our mouth shall shew forth thy praise.

Priest.

O God make speed to save vs.

Answer.

O Lord make haste to help vs.

¶ Here all standing vp the Priest shall say.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost.

Answer.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Priest.

Praise ye the Lord.

Answer.

The Lords name be praised

¶ U Then shall be said or sung the Psalms in order as they be appointed. Then a Lesson of the old Testament as is appointed; And after that Magnificat (or the song of the blessed virgin Mary) in English as followeth.

Magnificat S. Luke 1. My soul doth magnifie the Lord: and my spirit hath reioiced in God my Saviour.

For he hath regarded: the lowliness of his hand-maiden.

For behold, from henceforth: all generations shall call me blessed.

For he that is mighty hath magnified me: and holy is his Name.

And his mercy is on them that fear him: throughout all generations.

He hath shewed strength with his arm: he hath scattered the proud in the Imagination of their hearts.

He hath put down the mighty from their seat: and hath exalted the humble and meek. Evening Prayer He hath filled the hungTy with good things: and the rich he hath sent empty away.

He remembring his mercy, hath holpen his servant Israel : as he promised to our forefathers, Abraham, and his seed for ever.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: World without end. Amen.

¶ Or else this Psalm, except it be on the nineteenth day of the month, when it is read in the ordinary course of the Psalms.

1. Cantate Domino. Psal: 98. O sing vnto the Lord a new song: for he hath don marvelous things.

With his own right hand, and with his holy arm: hath he gotten himselfe the Victory.

The Lord declared his salvacon: his righteousness hath he openly shewed in the sight of the Heathen.

He hath remembred his mercy and truth toward the house of Israel: and all the ends of the world have seen the salvation of our God.

Shew your selves ioyfull vnto the Lord, all ye Lands: sing, rejoyce, and give thancks.

Praise the Lord vpon the Harp: sing to the Harp with a Psalm of thanksgiving.

With Trumpets also and Shawms: O shew yourselves ioyfull before the Lord the King.

Let the Sea make a noise, and all that therein is: the round world, and they that dwell therein.

Let the Floods clap their hands, and let the hills be joyfull together before the Lord: for he cometh to iudge the earth.

With righteousness shall he iudge the world: and the People with equity.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

¶ Then a Lesson of the New Testament, as it is appointed. And after that Nunc dimittis (or the song of Simeon) in English, as followeth.

Nunc dimittis. St. Luke 2.29 Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace: according to thy word.

For mine eyes have seen: thy Salvation.

which thou hast prepared: before the face of all people.

To be a light to lighten the Gentiles: and to be the glory of thy people Israel.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

¶ Or else this Psalm (except it be on the twelfth day of the month.)

Deus miscreatur. Psla: 67 God be mercifull vnto vs, and bless vs: and shew vs the light of his Countenance, and be mercifull vnto vs.

That thy way may be known saving health among all nations.

Let the people praise thee, O the people praise thee.

O Let the nations rejoyce and be glad: for thou shalt iudge the folk righteously, and govern the nations vpon earth.

Let the people praise thee, (O God :) yea let all the people praise thee.

Then shall the earth bring forth her increase: and God, even our own God shall give vs his blessing.

God shall bless vs: and all the ends of the world shall fear him.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: World without end. Amen.

¶ Then shall be said, or sung the Apostles Creed by the Minister, and the people standing.

I beleeve in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth. And in Iesus Christ his only Son our Lord, who was conceived by the holy Ghost, Borne of the virgin Mary. Suffered vnder Pontius Pilate, Was crucified, dead and buried. He descended into Hell, The third day he rose again from the dead. He ascended into heaven, And sitteth on the right hand of God the father Almighty. From thence he shall come to judge the quicke and the dead. I beleeve in the holy Ghost, The holy Catholick Church, The Communion of Saints, The forgiveness of Sinns, The Resurrection of the body, And the life everlasting. Amen.

¶ And after that these Prayers following, all devoutly kneeling, the Minister first pronouncing with a loud voice.

The Lord be with you.

Answer.

And with thy Spirit

Minister.

Let vs pray.

Lord have mercy vpon vs.

Christ have mercy vpon vs.

Lord have mercy vpon vs.

¶ Then the Minister, Clerks and people shall say the Lords Prayer with a loud voice.

Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give vs this day our daily bread. And forgive vs our Trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against vs. And lead vs not into temptation; But deliver vs from evil. Amen.

¶ Then the Priest standing vp, shall say.

O Lord shew thy mercy vpon vs.

Answer.

And grant vs thy Salvation.

Priest.

O Lord save the King*.

Answer.

And mercifully hear vs when we call vpon thee.

Priest.

Indue thy Ministers with righteousnes.

Answer.

And make thy chosen people joyfull.

Priest.

O Lord save thy people.

Answer.

And bless thine Inheritance.

Priest.

Give peace in our tyme, O Lord.

Answer.

Because there is none other that fighteth for vs but only thou, O God.

Priest.

O God make cleane our hearts within vs.

Answer.

And take not thy holy Spirit from vs.

¶ Then shall follow three Collects. The first of the day; The second for Peace; The third for aid against all perils as hereafter followeth: which two last Collects shall be daily said at Evening Prayer without Alteration.

¶ The second Collect at evening Prayer

O God from whom all holy desires, all good Counsels, and all iust Works do proceed : give vnto thy servants that peace which the world cannot give, that both our hearts may be sett to obey thy Comandments, and alsoe that by thee we being defended from the fear of our enemies, may passe our time in rest and quietness, through the meritts of Iesus Christ our Saviour. Amen.

¶ The third Collect for Aid against all perils.

Lighten our darkness wee beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great mercy defend vs from all Perils and dangers of this night, for the love of thy only Son, our Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen.

¶ In Quires and Places where they sing, here followeth the Antheme.

¶ A Prayer for the Kings Majesty.

Lord our heavenly Father, High and Mighty, King of kings, Lord of lords, the only ruler of Princes, who do'st from thy throne behold all the dwellers vpon earth, most heartily we beseech thee with thy favour to behould our most gracious sovereign Lord King Charles, and soe replenish him with the grace of thy holy spirit, that he may alway incline to thy will, and walk in thy way: Indue him plenteously with heavenly guifts, grant him in health and wealth long to live, strengthen him that he may vanquish and overcome aS his enemies, and finally after this life he may attaine everlasting ioy and felicity, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

¶ A Prayer for

Almighty God the fountaine of all goodness, we humbly beseech thee to bless

Indue

them with thy holy spirit, enrich them with thy heavenly grace, prosper them with all happines, and bring them to thine everlasting Kingdom, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

¶ A Prayer for the Clergy and people.

Almighty and everlasting God, who alone workest great marvels, send down vpon our Bishops and Curates, and all Congregations comitted to their charge the healthful Spirit of thy grace, and that they may truly please thee, pour vpon them the continual dew of thy blessing. Grant this, O Lord, for the honor of our Advocate and Mediator Iesus Christ. Amen

¶ A Prayer of Saint Chrysotome.

Allnighty God, who hast given vs grace at this time with one accord to make our common supplications vnto thee, and do'st promise that when two: or three are gathered together in thy Name, thou wilt grant their Requests; fulfill now, O Lord, the desires and petitions of thy servants, as may be most expedient for them, granting vs in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to come life everlasting. Amen.

¶ 2 Corinthians. 13.

The grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the Fellowship of the holy Ghost be with vs all evermore. Amen.

Here endeth the Order of Evening Prayer throughout the year.

Layout 2

¶ Vpon these Feasts; Christmas day, the Epiphany, Saint Matthias, Easter day, Ascension day, Whitsunday, Saint John Baptist, Saint James, Saint Bartholomew, Saint Matthew, Saint Simon, and Saint Jude, Saint Andrew, and vpon Trinity Sunday shall be sung, or said at morning Prayer, instead of the Apostles Creed, this Confession of our christian Faith, commonly called the Creed of Saint Athanasius, by the Minister and people standing.

M

Quicumque vult Whosoever will be saved : before all things it is necessary that he hold the Catholick Faith.

Which Faith, except every one do keepe whole and vndefiled : without doubt he shall perish everlastingly.

And the Catholick Faith is this : that we worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in vnity.

Neither confounding the persons : nor dividing the Substance.

For there is one person of the Father, another of the Son : and another of the holy Ghost.

But the Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost is all one : the glory equall, the Majesty coeternall.

Such as the Father is, such is the Son : and such is the holy Ghost.

The Father vncreate, the Son vncreate : and the holy Ghost vncreate.

The Father incomprehensible, the Son incomprehensible : and the holy Ghost incomprehensible.

The Father eternall, the Son eternall : and the holy Ghost eternall.

And yet they are not three eternals : but one eternall.

As also there are not three incomprehensibles, nor three vncreated, : but one vncreated, and one incomprehensible.

So likewise the Father is Almighty, the Son Almighty : and the holy Ghost Almighty. And yet they are not three Almightyes : but one Almighty.

So the Father is God, the Son is God : and the holy Ghost is God.

And yet they are not three Gods : but one God.

So likewise the Father is Lord, the Son Lord : and the holy Ghost Lord.

And yet not three Lords : but one Lord.

For like as we are compelled by the Christian Verity : to acknowledge every person by himselfe to be God and Lord.

So are we forbidden by the Catholick religion : to say there be three Gods, or three Lords.

The Father is made of none : neither created nor begotten.

The Son is of the Father alone : not made, nor created but begotten.

The holy Ghost is of the Father, and of the Son : neither made, nor created, nor begotten, but proceeding.

So there is one Father, not three Fathers, one Son, not three Sons : one holy Ghost, not three holy Ghosts.

And in this Trinity none is afore, or after other : none is greater, or lesse then another.

But the whole three persons are coeternall together : and coequall.

So that in all things, as is aforesaid : the Vnity in Trinity, and the Trinity in Vnity is to be worshipped.

He therefore that will be saved : must thus thinke of the Trinity.

Furthermore it is necessary to everlasting Salvation : that he also believe rightly the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ.

For the right Faith is that we believe, and confesse : that our Lord Iesus Christ the Son of God, is God and Man.

God of the Substance of the Father, begotten before the Worlds : and Man of the Substance of his mother, borne in the world.

Perfect God, and perfect man : of a reasonable soule, and humane flesh subsisting.

Equall to the Father, as touching his Godhead : and inferiour to the Father, as touching his manhood.

Who although he be God and man : yet he is not twoe, but one Christ.

One, not by Conversion of the Godhead into Flesh : but by takeing of the manhood into God.

One altogether, not by Confusion of Substance : but by Vnity of person.

For as the reasonable soule and Flesh is one man : So God and man is one Christ.

Who suffered for our Salvation : descended into hell; rose againe the third day from the dead.

He ascended into heaven, he sitteth on the right hand of the Father God Almighty : from whence he shall come to iudge the quicke and the dead.

At whose coming all men shall rise againe with their Bodies : and shall give Account for their own Works.

And they that have done good, shall go into life everlasting : and they that have done evill into everlasting fire.

This is the Catholick Faith : which except a man believe faithfully he cannot be saved.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son : and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be : world without end. Amen.

¶ Here followeth the Litanie, or generall Supplication, to be sung, or said after Morning Prayer, vpon Sundaies, Wednesdaies, and Fridayes, and at other times when it shall be comanded by the Ordinarie :

O God, the Father of heaven : have mercy vpon vs miserable Sinners.

God, the Father of heaven : have mercy vpon vs miserable Sinners.

O God the Son Redeemer of the World : haue mercy vpon vs miserable Sinners.

O God the Son Redeemer of the world : haue mercy vpon vs miserable Sinners.

O God the holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the Son : have mercy vpon vs miserable Sinners

O God the holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the Son : haue mercy vpon vs miserable Sinners.

O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three persons, and one God : have mercy vpon vs miserable Sinners.

O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three persons, and one God : haue mercy vpon vs miserable Sinners.

Remember not Lord our offences, nor the offences of our forefathers, neither take thou vengeance of our sinns : Spare vs good Lord, spare thy people whom thou hast redeemed with thy most pretious blood, and be not angry with vs forever.

Spare vs good Lord.

From all evil and mischief, from Sin, from the Crafts, and Assaults of the devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation,

Good Lord deliver vs.

From all blindness of heart, from Pride, vainglory and Hypocrisie, from envy, hatred and malice, and all vncharitableness,

Good Lord deliver vs.

From fornication, and all other deadly sin, and from all the deceipts of the world, the Flesh, and the devill,

Good Lord deliver vs.

From lightning and tempest, from plague, pestilence, and famine, from battel, and murder, and from sudden death,

Good Lord deliver vs.

From all sedition, privy Conspiracy and Rebellion from all false Doctrine, heresie and schism, from hardnes of heart, and contempt of thy Word and Commandment,

Good Lord deliver vs.

By the mystery of thy holy Incarnation, by thy holy Nativity and Circumcision, by thy Baptism, Fasting and Temptation,

Good Lord deliver vs.

By thine Agonie, and bloody sweat, by thy Cross and Passion, by thy pretious Death and Buriall, by thy glorious Resurrection, and Ascention, and by the coming of the holy Ghost,

Good Lord deliver vs.

In all time of our Tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of death, and in the day of Iudgement,

Good Lord deliver vs.

We sinners do beseech thee to hear vs, (O Lord God) and that it may please thee to rule and govern thy holy Church vniversall in the right Way.

We beseech thee to hear vs good Lord.

That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true worshipping of thee, in righteousnes and holines of life, thy servant Charles our most gracious King and Governour,

We beseech thee to hear vs good Lord.

That it may please thee to rule his heart in thy faith, fear, and love, and that he may evermore have Affiance in thee, and ever seek thy honor and glory,

We beseech thee to hear vs good Lord.

That it may please thee to be his defender, and keeper, giving him the victory over all his Enemies,

Wee beseech thee to hear vs good Lord.

That it may please thee to blesse and preserve

We beseech thee to hear vs good Lord.

That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, Priests and Deacons, with true knowledge and vnderstanding of thy word, and that both by their preaching and living they may set it forth and shew it accordingly,

We beseech thee to hear vs good Lord.

That it may please thee to indue the Lords of the Council, and all the Nobility with grace, wisedom, and vnderstanding,

We beseech thee to hear vs good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them grace to execute Iustice, and to mantein truth,

We beseech thee to hear vs good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people,

We beseech thee to hear vs good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to all Nations, vnity, peace and Concord,

We beseech thee to hear vs good Lord.

That it may please thee to give vs an heart to love and dread thee, and diligently to live after thy Comandements,

We beseech thee to hear vs good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to all thy people increase of grace, to heare meekly thy word, and to receive it with pure Affection, and to bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit,

We beseech thee to hear vs good Lord.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth, all such as have erred and are deceived,

We beseech thee to hear vs good Lord.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and help the weak-hearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat downe Satan vnder our Feet,

We beseech thee to hear vs good Lord.

That it may please thee to succor, helpe and comfort all that are in danger, necessity and tribulation,

We beseech thee to hear vs good Lord.

That it may please thee to preserve all that travel by land or by water, all Women laboring of Child, all sick persons and young children, and to shew thy pitie vpon all prisoners and Captives,

Wee beseech thee to hear vs good Lord.

That it may please thee to defend and provide for the fatherles children and widowes, and all that are desolate and oppressed,

Wee beseech thee to hear vs good Lord.

That it may please thee to have mercy vpon all men,

Wee beseech thee to hear vs good Lord.

That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecuters and slanderers, and to turn their hearts,

We beseech thee to hear vs good Lord.

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our vse the kindly fruits of the earth, so as in due time we may inioy them.

We beseech thee to hear vs good Lord.

That it may please thee to give vs true repentance, to forgive vs all our sins, negligences and Ignorances, and to indue vs with the grace of thy holy Spirit, to amend our lives according to thy holy Word.

We beseech thee to hear vs good Lord.

Son of God : Wee beseech thee to hear vs.

Son of God : we beseech thee to hear vs.

O Lamb of God : that takest away the sins of the world,

Grant vs thy peace.

O Lamb of God : that takest away the sins of the world,

Haue mercy vpon vs.

O Christ heare vs.

O Christ hear vs.

Lord have mercy vpon vs.

Lord haue mercy vpon vs.

Christ haue mercy vpon vs.

Christ haue mercy vpon vs.

Lord have mercy vpon vs.

Lord haue mercy vpon vs.

¶ Then shall the Priest (and the People with him) say the Lords Prayer.

Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom com. Thy will be don in earth as it is in heaven. Give vs this day our daily bread. And forgive vs our trespasses. As we forgive them that trespass against vs. And lead vs not into temptation; But deliver vs from evil. Amen.

¶ Priest.

O Lord deale not with vs after our sins.

Answer.

Neither reward vs after our iniquities.

¶ Let vs pray.

O God mercifull Father, that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart, nor the desire of such as be sorrowfull, mercifully assist our praiers that we make before thee in all our troubles and adversities whensoever they oppress vs, and graciously hear vs, that those evils which the Craft and subtilty of the devil or man worketh against vs, be brought to nought, and by the providence of thy goodness they may be dispersed, that we thy servants being hurt by no persecutions, may evermore give thanks vnto thee in thy holy Church, through Iesus Christ our Lord.

O Lord arise, help vs, and deliver vs for thy Names sake.

O God, we have heard with our eares, and our fathers have declared vnto vs the noble works that thou didst in their dayes, and in the old time before them.

O Lord arise, help vs, and deliver vs for thine honor.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son : and to the holy Ghost.

Answer.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be : world without end. Amen.

From our enemies defend us, O Christ.

Graciously look vpon our Afflictions.

Pitifully behold the sorrowes of our hearts.

Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.

Favourably with mercy hear our prayers.

O son of David have mercy vpon vs.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear vs, O Christ.

Graciously hear vs, O Christ, graciously hear vs, O Lord Christ.

¶ Priest.

O Lord let thy mercy be shewed vpon vs.

Answer.

As we doe put our trust in thee.

¶ Let vs pray.

We humbly beseech thee O Father, mercifully to look vpon our infirmities : and for the glory of thy Name turne from vs all those evils that we most righteously have deserved, and grant that in all our Troubles, we may put our whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in holines and purenes of living, to thy honor and glory, through our only mediatour and Advocate, Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

¶ A prayer of Saint Chrysostome.

Almighty God, who hast given vs grace at this tyme with one accord to make our comon supplications vnto thee, and dost promise that when two or three are gathred together in thy name, thou wilt grant their requests : fulfill now, O Lord, the desires and petic̄ons of thy servants as may be most expedient for them, granting vs in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to come life everlasting. Amen.

¶ 2. Corinthians. 13.

The grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the fellowship of the holy Ghost be with vs all evermore. Amen.

Here endeth the Litanie.

The Order for the Administration of the Lords Supper,

Or holy Communion

¶ So many as intend to be partakers of the holy Communion, shall signifie their Names to the Curate at least sometime the day before.

And if any of those be an open and notorious evilliver, or haue don any wrong to his Neighbours by word or Deed, so that the congregation be thereby offended: y. Curate hauing knowledge thereof shall call him and advertise him, that in any wise he presume not to come to the Lords Table, vntil he haue openly declared himselfe to haue truly repented, and amended his former naughty life, that the Congregation may thereby be satisfied which before were offended; and that he haue recompensed the parties to whom he hath don wrong, or at least declare himselfe to be in full purpose so to do, assoon as he conveniently may.

The same order shall the Curate vse with those betwixt whom he perceiveth Malice, and hatred to reign: not suffering them to be partakers of the Lords Table, vntil he know them to be reconciled. And if one of the parties so at variance be content to forgive from the bottom of his heart all that the other hath trespassed against him, and to make Amends for that he himselfe hath offended, and the other party will not be perswaded to a godly Vnity, but remain still in his frowardnes, and Malice: the Minister in that case ought to admitt the penitent person to the holy Communion, and not him that is obstinate. Provided that every Minister so repelling any, as is specified in this or the next precedent Paragraph of this Rubrik shall be obliged to giue an Account of the same to the Ordinary within fourteen Dayes after, at the farthest. And the Ordinary shall proceed against the offending person according to the Canon.

¶ The Table at the Communion time hauing a fair white Linen cloth vpon it, shall stand in the body of the Church, or in the Chancel, where Morning & Evening Prayer are appointed to be said. And the Priest standing at the north side of the Table shall say the Lords Prayer with the Collect followeing, the people kneeling.

Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come. Thy will be don in earth as it is in heaven. Give vs this day our daily bread. And forgive vs our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespasse against vs. And lead vs not into temptation, But deliver vs from evill Amen.

¶ The Collect.

Almighty God vnto whom all hearts be open, all desires known, and from whom no Secrets are hid: dense the thoughts of our hearts by the inspiration of thy holy spirit, that we may perfectly love thee, and worthily magnifie thy holy Name through Christ our Lord. Amen.

¶ Then shall the Priest, turning to the people rehearse distinctly all the ten Cofftandments: And the People still kneeling, shall after every Commandment ask God mercy for their Transgression thereof for the time past, and grace to keep the same for the time to come, asfolloweth.

¶ Minister.

God spake these words and said, I am the Lord thy God, Thou shalt have none other Gods but me.

¶ People.

Lord have mercy vpon vs, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.

¶ Minister.

Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any graven Image, nor the likenes of any thing that is in heaven above; or in the earth beneath, or in the water vnder the earth. Thou shalt not bow down to them, nor worship them. For I the Lord thy God, am a iealous God, and visit the sins of the Fathers vpon the children vnto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and shew mercy vnto thousands in them that love me, and keep my Commandments.

¶ People.

Lord have mercy vpon vs, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.

¶ Minister.

Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vaine, for the Lord will not hold him guiltles that taketh his name in vaine.

¶ People.

Lord have mercy vpon vs, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.

¶ Minister.

Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. six dayes shalt thou labour, and do all that thou hast to do, but the seaventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. In it thou shalt do no mafier of work, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, thy man-servant, and thy maid-servant, thy Cattel, and the stranger that is within thy Gates. For in six daies the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seaventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day and hallowed it

¶ People.

Lord have mercy vpon vs, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.

¶ Minister.

Honour thy father and thy mother, that thy dayes may be long in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.

¶ People.

Lord have mercy vpon vs, and incline our hearts to keep -this Law.

¶ Minister.

Thou shalt do no murther.

¶ People.

Lord have mercy vpon vs, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.

¶ Minister.

Thou shalt not commit adultery.

¶ People.

Lord have mercy vpon vs, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.

¶ Minister.

Thou shalt not steal.

¶ People.

Lord have mercy vpon vs, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.

¶ Minister.

Thou shalt not bear fals witnes against thy neighbour.

¶ People.

Lord have mercy vpon vs, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.

¶ Minister.

Thou shalt not covet thy neighbours house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbours wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing that is his.

¶ People.

Lord have mercy vpon vs, and write all these thy Lawes in our hearts, we beseech thee.

¶ Then shall follow one of these two Collects for the King, the Priest standing as before, and saying.

¶ Let vs pray.

Almighty God, whose kingdom is everlasting, and power infinite, have mercy vpon the whole Church, and so rule the heart of thy chosen servant Charles, our King, and Governour, that he (knowing whose minister he is) may above all things seek thy honour and glory; And that we and all his subjects (duly considering whose Authority he hath) may faithfully serve, honour, and humbly obey him in thee, and for thee according to thy blessed word, and ordinance, through Iesus Christ our Lord, who with thee and the holy Ghost, liveth and reigneth ever one God, world without end. Amen.

¶ Or.

Almighty and everlasting God, we are taught by thy holy word, that the hearts of Kings are in thy Rule an governance, and that thou dost dispose and turne them as it seerneth best to thy godly wisdom: we humbly beseech thee so to dispose and govern the heart of Charles, thy servant, our King and Governour, that in all his thoughts, words and works, he may ever seek thy honour and glory, and study to preserve thy people comitted to his charge, in wealth peace and godlines; Grant this O mercifull Father for thy dear sons sake, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

¶ Then shall be said the Collect of the day and immediatly after the Collect, the Priest shall read the Epistle, saying, The Epistle [ or The Portion of Scripture appointed for the Epistle] is written in theChapter of beginning at theverse. And the Epistle ended he shall say, Here endeth the Epistle. Then shall he read the Gospell (the people all standing up) saying, The holy Gospell is written in theChapter ofbeginning atverse. And the Gospell ended, shall be sung, or said the Creed following, the people still standing as before.

I beleeve in one God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth, and of all things visible, and invisible:

And in one Lord Iesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, Begotten of his Father before all Worlds, God of God, Light of Light, Very God of very God, Begotten not made, Being of one substance with the Father, By whom all things were made: Who for vs men, and for our Salvation came downe from heaven, And was incarnate by the holy Ghost of the Virgine Mary, And was made man, And was cruciﬁed also for vs vnder Pontius Pilate. He suffered and was buried, And the third day he rose againe according to the Scriptures, And ascended into heaven, And sitteth on the right hand of the Father. And he shall come againe with glory to iudge both the quicke and the dead: Whose kingdom shall have no end.

And I believe in the holy Ghost, The Lord and giver of life, who proceedeth from the Father and the Son, who with the Father and the Son together is worshipped and gloriﬁed, who spake by the prophets. And I believe one Catholick and Apostolick Church. J acknowledge one Baptism for the remission of Sins, And I looke for the Resurrection of the dead, And the life of the world to come. Amen.

¶Then the Curate shall declare vnto the People what holy-Dayes, or fasting-dayes are in the week following to be observed. And then alsoe (if occasion be) shall notice be given of the Communion: and the Bannes of Matrimony published, and Briefs, Citations and excommunications read. And nothing shall be proclaimed or published in the Church during the time of divine Service, but by the Minister: nor by him any thing but what is prescribed in the Rules of this Book, or enioyned by the King, or by the Ordinary of the place.

¶Then shall follow the Sermon or one of the Homilies already set forth, or hereafter to be set forth by Authoritie.

¶Then shall the Priest return to the Lords Table, and begin the Offertory saying one or more of these sentences following, as he thinketh most convenient in his discretion.

Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good Works and glorifie your Father which is in heaven.

Lay not vp for your selves treasure vpon the earth, where the rust and moth doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal : but lay vp for your selves treasures in heaven, where neither rust, nor moth doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through and steal.

Whatsoever ye would that men should do vnto you, even so do vnto them, for this is the Law and the Prophets

Not every one that sayth vnto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven, but he that doth the will of my Father which is in heaven.

Zaccheus stood forth, and said vnto the Lord, Be- hold Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have don any wrong to any man, I restore four fold.

Who goeth a Warfare at anytime of his own cost? who planteth a Vineyard, and eateth not of the fruit thereof? or who feedeth a flock, and eateth not of the milk of the flock ?

If we have sown vnto you spiritual things, is it a great matter if we shall reap your worldly things.

Do ye not know that they who minister about holy things, live of the sacrifice ? and they who wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar ? even so hath the Lord also ordeined that they who preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel.

He that soweth little, shall reap little : and he that soweth plenteously shall reap plenteously. Let every man do according as he is disposed in his heart, not grudging or of necessity for God loveth a cheer- full giver.

Let him that is taught in the word minister vnto him that teacheth in all good things. Be not de- ceived,

St: Mail. 5. S*: Matt. 6. St: Matt. 7- S*: Matt. 7. S*: Luke. 19. . Cor. 9. I. Cor. 9. . Cor. 9. . Cor: 9 Gal. 6. Page:The Book of Common Prayer.djvu/253 Page:The Book of Common Prayer.djvu/254 Page:The Book of Common Prayer.djvu/255 Page:The Book of Common Prayer.djvu/256 Page:The Book of Common Prayer.djvu/257 Page:The Book of Common Prayer.djvu/258 Page:The Book of Common Prayer.djvu/259 Page:The Book of Common Prayer.djvu/260 Page:The Book of Common Prayer.djvu/261 Page:The Book of Common Prayer.djvu/262 Page:The Book of Common Prayer.djvu/263 Page:The Book of Common Prayer.djvu/264 Page:The Book of Common Prayer.djvu/265 Page:The Book of Common Prayer.djvu/266 Page:The Book of Common Prayer.djvu/267 Page:The Book of Common Prayer.djvu/268

| And note, that every parishioner shall comunicate at the least three times in the year, of which Easter to be one. And yearly at Easter every parishioner shall reckon with the Parson, Vicar, or Curate, or his or their Deputie or Deputies, and pay to them or him all Ecclestasticall Duties accustomably due, then and at that time to be paid.

After the Divine Service ended, the mony given at the Offertory shall be disposed of to such pious, and charitable uses, as the Minister, and Church- wardens shall think fitt. Wherein if they dis- agree, tt shall be disposed of as the Ordinary shall appoint.

(| Whereas it 1s ordained in this Office, for the Admi- nistration of y¢ Lord’s Supper, that y* Comunicants should recetve y same kneeling; (Wes Order ts well meant, for a signification of our humble, & gratefull acknowledgement of y* Benefits of Christ, therein given to all worthy Receivers, & for y* avoiding of such pro- Sanation, and disorder in the holy Cotiunton, as might otherwise ensue:) Vet lest y¢ same kneeling should by any Persons, either out of ignorance, & infirmtly, or out of malice, & obstinacy, be misconstrued, 9 depraved; Jt is here declared; that thereby no Adoration ts in- tended, or ought to be done, either unto y* Sacramentall bread, or wine, there bodily received, or unto any Cor- poral Presence of Christ's naturall Flesh, & Blood. For y¢ Sacramentall bread, & wine remain still in their very naturall Substances, & therfore may not be adored, (for that were Jdolatrie, to be abhorred of all Saithfull Christians; ) And y¢ naturall body, & blood ¥ our Savior Christ are in Heaven, & not here; it

cing against y¢ truth of Christ's naturall body, to be at one time tn more places, than one,

Texte du domaine public, source : Wikisource (en), « Book of Common Prayer », 13 sous-pages. Édition numérique EbookClassics.
